## The Pure Basics:

1. The language is case-sensitive.
   ex: roll() and Roll() are different.

2. All File names are in snake case. (i.e lower case, seperated via underscore.), no spaces or special characters allowed.
   ex: i_am_file.go  

3. Statements does not need to end in semi-colon (;). Go compiler automatically inserts semicolons at the end of statements. 
   However if multiple statements are written on one line,they must be separated by ; (semi colon)

4. When a program executes, the first function to be called after initilaizations is the main() function.
   main() function has no arguments and no return values.


## Packages:

- Go follows the concept of packages where every go-file belongs to one (and only one) package.  
- A package can contain multiple Go files, A package may or may not contain a Go file having same name as that of package in which it resides.
- Each Go application contains one package called "main".
- Each Directory is considered a single package but there is no concept of subpackages. So, Child directories are also considered as seperate packages.

Since a Go program consists of several packages, Inorder to make a successfull program build, all the packages, and the files within them, must be compiled in the correct order. This correct order is determined via the Package dependencies.
Another point to note is that, The package is compiled as a unit i.e all source files within a package must be compiled together.

NOTE: If a package is changed and recompiled, all the client programs that use this package must be recompiled too!

If A.go depends on B.go which depends on C.go:
- compile C.go, B.go, then A.go.
- to compile A.go, compiler reads B.o not C.o.

### Importing Packages:

The packages are imported using following syntax:
  ```
  import "fmt"
  ```
import “fmt” tells Go that our program needs functions or other elements from the package named "fmt".
Importing a package does not loads the full sourcecode of that package, It only loads the publicly declared Struct, Methods and Variables. 

If the importpath of package starts with a . or .. element, it is assumed to be a filesystem path.
Otherwise, the package is searched within GOPATH/src. 

## The Visibility rule:

The visibility rule determines which of the Methods, Structs or Variables of a Package will be available outside of the Package. 

The Rule says that, if a code object (i.e Methods, Structs or Variables) starts with an Uppercase letter it will be available outside the package.
And, if a code object starts with lowercase letter it will not be available outside package.

ex:
``` 
Global()   // Will be available outside the package 
private()  // Will not be available outside the scope of package
```

Remark: importing a package which is not used in the rest of the code is a build-error 
(for example: imported and not used: os)

## Comments:
One line comment: //
Multi line block comment: /* */

## Sample program execution:

The execution of the program follows Bottom-up approach. Lets try to understand this via example.
Suppose In our program, we have following dependency chart:
 - package main imports package A
 - package A imports package B
Now, the compiler will start from package "main" and import all its dependencies. In this case it will import package "A".
Now, it will import dependencies of package "A", In this case it will import package "B".
Since, package "B" does not have any dependencies it will stop at this point and evalute the 
 - constants of package B
 - global variables of package B 
 - call the init() function of package B
Once done, it will do the same for package "A", i.e
 - evaluate constants of package A
 - evaluate global variables of package A 
 - call the init() function of package A
Once finished, it will do the same for "main" package, i.e
 - evaluate constants of package "main"
 - evaluate global variables of package "main" 
 - call the init() function of package "main"

## Type Conversions:

In Go, Conversion from one type of value to another type needs to be done explicitely or manually. 
Go does not support implicit or automatic conversions.

But even the explicit conversions can only succeed in certain well defined cases. 
An example of such a case is when converting from a Narrower type to a Broader type i.e ```int16 to int32```. 
However, When converting from a broader type to a narrower type (i.e int32 to int16, or float32 to int) loss of value (truncation) can occur.

## Constant:

Constants are the code objects that contain data which cannot change. Constants are evaulated at the compile time itself.
Only certain datatypes are allowed for Constants, these are:
- Boolean
- Number (integer, float or complex)
- String 

Ex:
```
const b string = “abc”
```
A Constant can be defined as a calculation, but all the values necessary for calculation must be available at the compile time.
```
const c1 = 2/3          // Valid
const c2 = getNumber() // not Valid. gives the build error: getNumber() used as value

```
Assigning values to multiple constants in single call is possible.
```
const beef, two, c = “meat”, 2, “veg”
const Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
```
//@todo: IOTA trick??????????
https://splice.com/blog/iota-elegant-constants-golang/


## Variables:

A declaration of a variable with var automatically initializes it to the zero-value defined for its type.
Types can be :
a:) Elementary (or primitive), like int, float, bool, string,
b:) Structured (or composite), like struct, array, slice, map, channel,
c:) interfaces, which only describe the behavior of a type.

```
var a int       // variable declaration
a = 15          // variable assignment 
var a int = 15  // var assignment + declaration
a := 15         // short declaration syntax
var a = 15      // Automatic type inference
var a, b, c int
var a, b, c int = 10, 11, 12 // parallel or simulataneous assignment.
a, b, c := 10, 11, "hello"
```

### Variable scope:

- A variable declared outside of a function has global or package scope, i.e it is available throughout that package.
- A variable declared inside of a function has local scope and is available only within that function.
- A variable declared inside a control struct such as if-else, switch, for etc have block level scope.

### Variable Shadowing:

If a variable is declared in the local scope with the name that conflicts with another variable present in global scope, then the 
priority is given to local scope variable and the global scope variable is said to be shadowed within that function.
Note: Same concept applies for block level too.  

Go compiler has the ability to derive the type of variable from its value, this is called Automatic type inference.
NOTE: Short declaration syntax cannot be used for Package level variables.


## Functions:

A public function uses PascalCasing, a normal func uses camelCasing.

A function can return more than one value, then the return-types are indicated separated by comma’s and surrounded by ( ). 
ex:
```
func FunctionName (a typea, b typeb) (t1 type1, t2 type2) {
    return var1, var2
} 
```

### init() function:

This is a special function, which is executed automatically before main() function of the package main.
 - A source file can contain only one init() function.
 - init() function cannot be called explicitely.


## Value types and Reference types:

There are certain Datatypes which are by default Value type and certain datatypes which are by default Reference Type.

1. Value types: All primary types i.e int, float, strings, bool etc, Arrays, Structs.
     - variables of value type are contained in Stack memory.

2. Reference types: Slices, Maps, Channels, Pointers.
     - variables of reference types are stored in Heap.

### Swap two variables A, B:

In Go, two variables can be swapped in single statement.
```
B, A = A, B //swapped in single line.
```

 
## Format Specifiers:

%v  => uses default specifier for the supplied variable. (%t for booleaon, %d for int etc)
%+v => in case of struct prints field names as well.
%#v => Prints In Go's representation.
%T  => prints type of variable.

%t => booleon

%d => int
%b => int base 2
%o => int base 8
%x => int base 16

%U => unicode code point for the character.
%c => character represented via code point.
%s => string

%f => float


## Numerical Data types:

On a Broader level, Numeric data types can be divided into two categories:
- Architecture dependent types
- Architecture independent types

1. Architecture dependent types: These depend on the computer architecture on which the program will run. 
In 32 bit systems they occupy 32 bit and on 64 bit systems they take 64 bits.
Types: int, uint, uintptr 

2. Architecture independent types: These take fixed size and does not depend on computer on which program is run.
Types:
  int8,  uint8 ->   8 bits
  int16, uint16 -> 16 bits
  int32, uint32 -> 32 bits
  int64, uint64 -> 64 bits
  float32, float64

Note: int8 and int16 are different types, explicit conversion needs to be done to convert one to another. Ex:
```
    var n int8 = 2
    var m int16
    m = n        // not possible
    m = int16(n) // works!!
```    

## Aliasing Types:

Aliasing is a very cool feature, It says, A type can also be given a custom name, such as:
```
type TimeZone int
```
in this, int is aliased as TimeZone.

However, for Go compiler these are two different types, so an explicit conversion is needed while doing something like this:
```  
  type TimeZone int
	var a int = 5
	var b TimeZone
	b = TimeZone(a)
	fmt.Printf("%v", b)
```

## Characters:

A character is represented as a byte, which is actually an alias of uint8.

In ASCII table, decimal value for A is 65 and hexadecimal is \x41. So A can be declared as:
```
var ch byte = 65 or var ch byte = '\x41'
```
An ASCII character takes only 1 byte, but there is also support for Unicode characters(UTF-8) which can consume upto 4 bytes.
Unicode characters are represented in codepoints or what is called as runes. Runes are an alias for int32 datatype.

A unicode code point is represented as U+hhhh, where 'h' is a hexa decimal number. More precisely, something like this:
```
\u0041 (\u followed by 4 hexa chars) or \U00101234 (\U followed by 8 hexa chars)
```
Incase, unicode character can fit in 2 bytes we use first representation format, incase it needs more bytes we use second one.
```
  var ch1 rune = '\u0041'         //Note that characters are enclosed in single quotes.
  var ch2 rune = '\U00101234'
  
  fmt.Printf("%d %d", ch1, ch2)   // 65   1053236
  fmt.Printf("%U %U", ch1, ch2)   // U+0041   U+101234
  fmt.Printf("%c %c", ch1, ch2)   // A       []
```
utf8 package provides conversion from rune -> []bytes and vice-versa.
A rune can be converted to []byte by using utf8.EncodeRune(), and []byte to rune by using utf.DecodeRune()

## Strings:

In Go, strings are stored as UTF-8. So, strings are a sequence of variable-length characters.
Each character can take 1-4 bytes for storage. If its a ASCII character it will take 1 byte else it will take more than that.

String are represented as:
- Interpreted Strings : enclosed in double codes. In this special characters such as \n, \t, \u are interpreted. 
- Raw String : enclosed in backtick (not single quotes)

The initial value of a string is empty string ("").

A string can be seen as a slice of bytes i.e []bytes. So simple indexing can be used to access contents of a string.
```
var str string = "hello"
```
In above example,
str[0] => represents first byte.
str[1] => represents second byte.
Since, ASCII characters take up only 1 byte: str[0] == "h" and str[1] == "e".
NOTE: Beware, this will not be true when dealing with non ASCII chars.

Strings are immutable, which means they cannot be modified. Thus following operation is invalid:
```
str[0] = 'A'  //Invalid operation as strings are immutable.
```
Also, one cannot take address of a string byte: 
```
s := &str[0] //Invalid
```
To modify a string one first needs to convert string to a slice of bytes, and then can use indexes to modify it.
```
s:="hello"
c := []byte(s)
c[0] = 'c'
s2 := string(c)   // s2 == "cello"
xptr := &c[0]     // Also, now u can take address of element xptr == 0xsd233e00ed
```
### Concatenating Strings
Two strings can be concatenated as:
```
str = Str1 + Str2
```
However, using such operation in a loop is not very efficient. Try using strings.Join() and ever better is byte-buffer.

### Number of Chars in a String

If you need to get number of Characters in a string, which does not contain multi-byte characters, use:
```
len(str) => gives the number of bytes in a string. So works for strings having all single byte chars.
```
If you need to get number of Characters in a string, which may or may not contain multi-byte characters, use:
```
utf8.RuneCountInString(str)   //!!SAFE, works for multibyte chars too
```
### Iterating Strings

A for-range loop can be used to iterate over characters of the string (not bytes).
```
  var ch string = "hòla"

	for k, v := range ch {
		fmt.Printf("\n index:%d, value:%c, intv:%d", k, v, v)
	}

Outputs:
 index:0, value:h, intv:104
 index:1, value:ò, intv:242   //this character took 2 bytes.
 index:3, value:l, intv:108
 index:4, value:a, intv:97
```

For normal case:
```
var ch string = "hola"

	for k, v := range ch {
		fmt.Printf("\n index:%d, value:%c, intv:%d", k, v, v)
	}
Outputs:
 index:0, value:h, intv:104
 index:1, value:o, intv:111   
 index:3, value:l, intv:108
 index:4, value:a, intv:97
```

This method can be used to calculate number of characters in case string has non-ASCII chars.
utf8.RuneCountInString(str) can also be used to get number of characters in string.

A string can be converted to slice of rune, simply via:
```
var r = []rune(str) // length of rune will give the number of characters.
```
And slice of rune can be converted to string via:
```
var s = string(runes)
```

### Strings Type Conversion:

strconv package is used for such conversions. 
strconv.Itoa() => convert int to string
strconv.Atoi() => convert string to int

strconv.FormatFloat() => convert float to str
strconv.ParseFloat() => convert str to float


## Pointers:

Pointers are special datatype which can store address of a object. 

The address of an object can be extracted by using the address-of operator (```&```). 
This operator when placed before a variable gives the memory address of that variable.

```
var i1 = 5
fmt.Printf("\n value:%v, address:%v", i1, &i1)
//output:  value:5, address:0xc42000e2b8
```

A pointer variable can be declared as:```var intP *int```. 
```  
  var i1 = 5
  var intP *int
  intP = &i1
```
It stores the address of a variable which points to integer value.(@todo: Need a fig for this)
A pointer takes 64bit (8 bytes) on 64bit systems and 32 bit on 32bit systems.

The default value of a pointer is nil.

Using the * operator to get the actual value of the pointer is called dereferencing or indirection.
ex: fmt.Printf("\n%v", *intP) //intP pointer is dereferenced.

POinter arithmetic is not allowed in GO, means following is invalid:
intP = intP + 2
or, intP++

Pointed variables persist in memory as long as there is atleast one pointer pointing to it. So, their lifetime is independent
of the scope in which they were created.

Nesting of pointers is allowed. So, a pointer can point to another pointer which points to another pointer and so on.
(@todo: need  a figure for this)

Dereferencing a nil pointer will make the process crash.
```
ex: var p *int
    *p = 0 //nil pointer dereference.
```     

## new() and make():

These are two functions used to initialize objects. 

- Both are used to allocate memory and Both allocates memory on heap.

The difference is that new() is meant to be used with value type structures like: structs, arrays.
make() is meant to be used with reference type structures such as slices, maps, channels.

new() allocates memory and provides a pointer to that location.
make() allocates memory and returns initialized value.  


## How to define basic package structure?

myproj/
   - main/
       - main.go
   - pack1/
       - pack1.go
	   - pack3/
   	       - pack3.go
   - pack2/
       - pack2.go

The above program can be run as:
-> move to myproj folder
-> go run main/main.go
-> go build main/main.go (to compile)	   

In the above example, 
  - pack1 can be imported within main.go  as:  import("../pack1")
  - pack2 can be imported within pack1.go as:  import("../pack2")
  - pack3 can be imported within pack2.go as:  import("./pack2")    



## How package referencing works?

  Referencing is used when importing a particular package within another package.
  or
  in go get [importpath], go install [importpath], go build [importpath], go run [importpath] like commands.

If the importpath of package starts with a . or .. element, it is assumed to be a filesystem path.
Otherwise, the package is searched within GOPATH/src. 

Wildcard -> "..." is a wildcard replacement for "*".
So, In order to test all the subdirectories within package "net", we can simply say
  go test net/... 
   or we can move to net directory and say,
   go test ./...   
This will compile net package, will also compile net/http package and will also compile net/http/server package.			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			







			
           
      



 










  


















 

    








































  











 


 










#######################################################################################






  






