## Structs
Structs are composite types.

A sample struct can be defined as:
```
type S struct {
   f1 int
   f2 string
} 
```

var s1 S = S{} // allocates memory for struct

Structs are **value type**. new() can be used to allocate memory for struct and returns a pointer to struct.
```
var s1 *S = new(S) //allocate memory and return pointer to allocated memory.
```
One way of getting the pointer to struct is as follows:
```
var s1 *S = &S{} //internally this also calls new function.
```

Values can be directly assign to pointer to a struct. No need to dereference it first.
```
var pers2 *Person = new(Person)
 pers2.firstName   = “Chris”
(*pers2).firstName = “Chris” //this is also valid, but not required.
```

## Visibility Rule:
If the struct name starts with *Capital* letter its **exported** else its not exported.
Same applies to the fields of a struct, If a field name starts with capital letter its exported field, else its non exported.
A struct can contain mixed fields some exported and some non-exported.

## Type Conversion b/w struct and its alias:
```
type number struct {
  i int
}

type nr number

a := nr{5}
var b number
b = a         //compile error
b = number(a) // works!!
```
## Creating factories:
Factory functions can be defined to serve the role of constructors as in oo languages.
```
//sample struct
type File struct {
  fd   int
  name string
}

//factory function for struct.
func NewFile(fd int, name string) *File {
  if fd < 0 {
    return nil
  }
  return &File{fd, name} //this is same as doing new
}
//calling factory function
f := NewFile(10, “./test.txt”)
```
In order to force the users to use factory function instead of using new(). Make the struct unexported.
 
## Struct with tags:
A field in struct can have name, type and tag. 
A *tag* is a tring attached to a field which could represent an important label.
The tag content can only be accessed via reflect package.
See: Reflect package on how this to be done. Tags are actually important becos they r used in json conversion, print functions etc.

## Anonymous fields in structs:
A field which does not have any name is called anonymous or embedded field. Such a field can be directly accessed by its type name.
```
type S struct {
  f1 string
  string    //anonymous field
}
s1 := S{}
s1.f1 = "Iam"
s1.string = "hello" //assigning to anonymous
fmt.Printf("\n%v\n", s1)

output:
{Iam hello}
```
Note: The only limitation is that only one anonymous field for each type is allowed.

## Embedded Structs:
Since a struct is also a datatype, it is possible to use a struct as one of the fields of another struct.
But it is called embedded struct only if it does not have a name associated to it.
```
type A struct {
  Af1 int
  Af2 int
  Af3 int
}
type B struct {
  Bf1 int
  A     //only struct type is defined, no name is associated to it.
  Af3 int
}
a1 := B{1,A{2,3,4},5}
fmt.Println(a1.Bf1, a1.Af1, a1.Af2, a1.Af3)
fmt.Println(a1.A)

//output:
1 2 3 5
{2,3,4}
```
Note: Incase, there is a conflict in field names. The field from inner struct is shadowed via field from outer struct.
As the field AF3 in above example. However, the field can be accessed as a1.A.AF3, Note how similar this behaviour
is to class inheritence behaviour in oo languiages.

## Methods:
A method is a special kind of function, which acts on a specific variable type.
The methods are generally attahced to structs but can be attached to any type.
such as:
  -> methods can be attached to aliases of int, float, string.
  -> methods can be attached to maps too.
  -> even they can be attached to function types.

limitations:
  -> methods cannot be attached to interface types.
  -> methods cannot be attached to a pointer type but can be attached to a pointer to any given type.Below example describes it:
  
- This is valid -->
```
type Number int

func  (n *Number) Set () {
   *n = 10
}
func  (n *Number) Get () Number {
  return *n
} 
var n Number
n.Set()  
fmt.Printf("\n%v\n", n.Get())
//output:
10
```
- This is NOT valid -->
```
type Number *int

func  (n Number) Set () {
   n = 10
}
func  (n Number) Get () Number {
  return n
} 
var n Number
n.Set()  
fmt.Printf("\n%v\n", n.Get())

output:
compile-error: Invalid receiver type Number.
```
A method and the type on which its defined must be in the same package.
This is the reason why we cannot define methods directly on int, string and float types.
However, the methods can be defined on their aliases.

## Deciding b/w Pointer and Value Type Receiver
A Receiver is a variable type on which methods are defined.

If we use a value type receiver, every time a method needs to be called a copy of original struct is to be created. 
```
func (this S) Set() {
  //here 'this' is copy of struct S
}
```

If we use a pointer type receiver, instead of creating a new copy a reference to original struct is passed.
```
func (this *S) Set() {
  //here 'this' is not a copy but reference to actual struct data.
}
```
So, it is advisable to use pointer type receiver whereever possible for permormance reasons.

NOTE: 
we do not need to explicitely dereference a variable when calling a method defined on a pointer to that type (This is automatically handled).
```
type Number int

func  (n *Number) Set () {
   *n = 10
}
func  (n *Number) Get () Number {
  return *n
}
var n Number
(&n).Set() //no need to do this
n.Set()  // this works!!
```
Though the methods are defined on type *Number we can directly call it from variable of type Number (conversion is done implicitly).

Same is also valid for situations where methods are defined on a type and are being called from pointer to that type. ex below:
```
type Number int

func  (n Number) Set () {
   n = 10
}
func  (n Number) Get () Number {
  return n
}
var n Number
(&n).Set() //this works!!
n.Set()  // this also works!!
```
NOTE: if a method is already declared on a type, we cannot define method with same name on its pointer type.
```
func  (n Number) Set () {
   n = 10
}
func  (n *Number) Set () {
  n = 10
} 
//This is not valid.

OUTPUT:
compile error: method redeclared.

```

## Methods and Embedded structs:
The methods of embedded structs can simply be called as:
```
type IS struct {
  f1 int
}

func (this *IS) Get() int{
  return this.f1
}

type OS struct {
  IS
  f2 int
}
s1 := OS{}
s1.f1 = 10
s1.f2 = 20
fmt.Printf("\n%v\n", s1.Get())
//output:
10
```

Now, if the Outer struct also has method Get then it will shadow the method of inner struct.(Method Overriding)
```
func (this *OS) Get() (int) {
  return this.f1 + this.f2
} 
s1.Get() //will now call Get method of outer struct.

//Method of inner struct can be called as:
s1.IS.Get() 
```
Q: What if struct field is of anonymous interface type?? explore possibilities.


## Multiple Inheritence:
With Go one can easily implement multiple inheritence using embedded structs, consider example below:
```
type Camera struct { }

func (c *Camera) TakeAPicture() string {
  return “Click”
}

type Phone struct { }

func (p *Phone ) Call() string {
  return “Ring Ring”
}

// multiple inheritance
type CameraPhone struct {
 Camera
 Phone
}

cp := new(CameraPhone)
cp.Call()
cp.TakeAPicture()
```

## Using String() method
The fmt package uses String() method by default in fmt.Print functions. 
So if a type has String() method defined it will be used. The string() method should always return string.

NOTE: do not use fmt.Print functions inside of String() method as it will result in infinite recursion.
ex: 
```
func (tn *TwoInts) String() string {
  return “(“+ strconv.Itoa(tn.a) +” / “+ strconv.Itoa(tn.b) + “)”
}
```

## Garbage Collection:
Garbage collector is run automatically at varied time intervals (generally 5 minutes) via Go runtime to freeup staled objects. 
It is run in seperate goroutine.
It can also be manually run via using runtime.GC() method.

To view amount of memory consumed via program at any given instant use:
```
  statsObj := new(runtime.MemStats)
  runtime.ReadMemStats(statsObj)
  fmt.Printf("%v Bytes\n", statsObj.Alloc/1024)
```

## Finalizer:
Suppose special action needs to be taken right before an object is garbage collected. Such as writing a log file.
Finalizer can be used for such cases. It always runs in separate go routine.
```  
  runtime.SetFinalizer(obj, func(obj *typeObj))
   //1st param => reference to obj for which finalizer is to be run.
   //2nd param => finalizer function to be executed.
```
 SetFinalizer function will not be executed if the program execution ends before a GC for object could be executed.  
   
